   PYMNTS.com » Feed PYMNTS.com » Comments Feed PYMNTS.com » AWS and
   NVIDIA Expand Collaboration to Deliver Generative AI Infrastructure
   Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate PYMNTS.com » JSON Feed
   PYMNTS.com » AWS and NVIDIA Expand Collaboration to Deliver Generative
   AI Infrastructure Comments Feed

--

AWS and NVIDIA Expand Collaboration to Deliver Generative AI Infrastructure

--
   to deliver advanced infrastructure, software and services for
   generative artificial intelligence (AI) innovations.

   The partnership aims to provide customers with the necessary
   technologies for training foundation models and building generative AI
   applications, the companies said in a Tuesday (Nov. 28) press release.
--
   Additionally, NVIDIA and AWS will collaborate to host NVIDIA DGX Cloud,
   an AI-training-as-a-service, on AWS, the release said. This will be the
   first DGX Cloud featuring GH200 NVL32, providing developers with the
   largest shared memory in a single instance. DGX Cloud on AWS will
   accelerate the training of cutting-edge generative AI and large
   language models.
--
   The collaboration also includes Project Ceiba, where NVIDIA and AWS are
   designing the world’s fastest GPU-powered AI supercomputer, per the
   release. This supercomputer will feature 16,384 NVIDIA GH200 Superchips
   and will be used by NVIDIA for its own research and development in
   generative AI.

   AWS will introduce three new Amazon EC2 instances powered by NVIDIA
   GPUs: P5e instances for large-scale generative AI and high-performance
   computing (HPC) workloads, and G6 and G6e instances for a wide range of
   applications including AI fine-tuning, inference, graphics and video
   workloads, according to the release. G6e instances are particularly
--
   It was reported in September that NVIDIA has become the go-to company
   for computer chips used in AI processes. The company’s market value hit
   the trillion-dollar mark earlier this year thanks to high demand for
   its chips that are used to train generative AI models.

--

   AWS and NVIDIA Expand Collaboration to Deliver Generative AI
   Infrastructure
--
   Report: Farfetch Founder José Neves Aims to Take Company Private
   See More In: AI, Amazon Web Services, artificial intelligence, AWS,
   cloud computing, generative AI, News, NVIDIA, PYMNTS News, What's Hot

--

   This AI Pioneer Says the Tech’s Best Applications Are in Payments
   Trustly October 2023 Survey
--
   [ ] PYMNTS Today
   [ ] Artificial Intelligence
   [ ] Cryptocurrency
