
   Artificial intelligence

Artificial intelligence guzzles billions of liters of water

--

   Artificial intelligence Columns of steam emerge from Google’s hyper
   data center in The Dalles, Oregon.
--
   Google? On November 4, 2022, ChatGPT — the chatbot that kicked off the
   race for generative artificial intelligence (AI) — was introduced to
   the world. Google already had similar large language models, such as
--

   The additional effort to develop large AI models may have skyrocketed
   the water consumption of Google and Microsoft, the two technology
--
   engineering at the University of California, Riverside, and specialist
   in AI sustainability, believes. “We cannot say it with certainty if the
   companies don’t provide concrete data, but the increase in 2022 was
   quite hefty compared to 2021, and we know that at that time they
   invested very heavily in generative AI, as well as in other AI-related
   services,” he explains via email. “AI has been integrated into almost
   all of Microsoft and Google’s everyday products, including their search
--
   Companies do not share data on how much extra water and energy it costs
   to train AI models compared to the usual consumption of data centers.
   “What we do know, because the director of one of these infrastructures
   confirmed it to me, is that the chips used in AI training consume much
   more than those of common servers,” points out Ana Valdivia, professor
   of artificial intelligence, government and policy at the Oxford
   Internet Institute, whose most recent research focuses on assessing the
   environmental impact of AI.

--
   smaller than those of Microsoft and Google. Even though they are
   business giants and their activity has grown, their commitment to AI is
   not so big. Although this technology is present in their applications,
--

   The industry is clearly betting on integrating AI into more and more
   products and services. Is there a way to train AI models without
   consuming large amounts of water? Ren thinks not. “Electric dryers
--
   sources, the new data centers that the company plans to develop
   especially for AI will use electric drying systems that do not require
   water (other than that necessary to generate electricity). According to
--

The dirty secret of artificial intelligence

--
    2. Mathematician Marcus du Sautoy: ‘There is a possibility that
       artificial intelligence will become conscious’
    3. The Chapman-Silverman event, the most intense geomagnetic storm
