
          + Artificial Intelligence
          + Competition
--
            Strategic Commitments for Europe
          + Towards Sovereign AI: Europe´s greatest challenge?
     * Transport
--
    3. Technology
    4. Artificial Intelligence: opening doors to a more diverse,
       equitable, and inclusive labour market

Artificial Intelligence: opening doors to a more diverse, equitable, and
inclusive labour market
--

   The age of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has arrived, and with it the
   potential to improve the way we live and work. As several jurisdictions
   around the world start to regulate the use of AI – with the European
   Union taking the lead with the most comprehensive set of rules to be
--
   innovative development but also close the door to the possibilities
   that AI holds for workers and employers.

--

   At its core, AI is simply a tool that, when used ethically and
   effectively, has vast promise for creating opportunities for people and
   businesses alike. With the assistance of AI, workers can better develop
   skills throughout their career, while the currently untapped skills of
--
   global economy and social fabric by ensuring that people are at the
   heart of labour markets. Far from viewing AI as a threat to jobs, we
   see it as a job creator and an equalizer throughout society. With the
   help of AI the labour market can be opened further to underrepresented
   groups, creating greater diversity, gender equity, inclusion, and a
--

   Through the use of AI, the future of work is bright. However, to make
   that future a reality, fair regulation is needed to allow for
   innovation and experimentation. As the European Union (EU) finalises
   its discussions on the AI Act, members of the World Employment
   Confederation (WEC) ’s)’sC’sE’sW’sare becoming increasingly concerned
--
   innovative development but could close the door to the possibilities
   that AI holds for workers and employers.

   What is clear is that AI as a whole cannot be simply categorised. With
   the EU leaning toward classifying AI in employment services as
   high-risk, WEC members view such a position as unwarranted and
   detrimental to the industry. It is clear that AI use within and across
   industries differs a great deal. From chatbots, ranking, to training
--

   Furthermore, with the scope of AI being incredibly broad, the HR
   industry is focused on taking a responsible and narrow approach to its
   use. Specifically, the industry welcomes polices that require AI
   vendors to prove their algorithms used to make hiring decisions are
--
   carrying out algorithmic risk assessments to align with the possible
   final text of the AI Act to ensure that people’s fundamental rights are
   protected.

   When relying on staffing databases to develop AI algorithms, key to
   best matching candidates with jobs, major staffing companies already
   operate under the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) rules
   and expect those same conditions to transfer to the use of AI. Beyond
   data protection, WEC members are looking forward to receiving formal
--

   The introduction of AI in our lives is no longer a question of if and
   when, but of how best it can be utilized. With the ethical development
   of AI use within the HR services industry, the global and European
   labour and skills shortage can be finally addressed. Through the use of
   AI our industry will be better adept at identifying and matching the
   skills required for today, while improving the kinds of training
--

   In order for AI to become part of the answer to filling today’s labour
   gaps and preparing the workforce of the future, it must be guided by a
--
   As outlined in the WEC Code of Ethical Principles in the use of
   Artificial Intelligence facilitate their journey through the world of
   work, supporting both workers and employers. When applied to HR
   services, AI can make a significant contribution to increasing
   diversity, equity, and inclusion throughout Europe and around the world
   and we hope the EU AI Act will help make that a reality.

--

     * AI Act
     * AI ethics
     * employment
