   PYMNTS.com » Feed PYMNTS.com » Comments Feed PYMNTS.com » Companies
   With AI-Driven Strategies Outcompete Peers, Study Finds Comments Feed
   alternate alternate alternate PYMNTS.com » JSON Feed PYMNTS.com »
   Companies With AI-Driven Strategies Outcompete Peers, Study Finds
   Comments Feed
--

Companies With AI-Driven Strategies Outcompete Peers, Study Finds

--
   the industry is at a crossroads, facing a technological advancement
   that promises to leave no sector untouched: artificial intelligence
   (AI). The technology’s potential benefits read like an AR team’s wish
   list — and the reality is not far off. 77%: Share of CFOs who report
--
   pressures threaten its flow, elevating AR teams to the top of
   organizations’ priority lists. While AI is not without risk and must be
   understood and implemented with care, the upside of AI adoption for AR
   is increasingly difficult to deny.

   In this edition of the “Working Capital Tracker®,” we zoom in on how AI
   can help AR teams ease pain points so companies can thrive amid
--

AI Can Speed Payment Processing and Boost Efficiency

--
   biggest challenge inhibiting collection. By automating tasks in the
   order-to-cash process, AI can increase their speed and efficiency,
   taking the first step in helping organizations achieve a healthy bottom
   line. Companies can also increase AR teams’ productivity by off-loading
   routine and labor-intensive tasks to AI, such as data entry, compliance
   checks, invoice processing and collections, freeing human workers to
--
   Making it easier for customers to pay is the first step in ensuring
   swift payment. AI-enabled virtual assistants and chatbots offer a 24/7
   self-service tool, allowing customers to access their transaction
   histories and make requests or file disputes. In the case of AR
   disputes contributing to payment delays, AI can accelerate resolution
   cycle time by identifying and assigning reason codes to each dispute
--

   AI’s ability to collect and draw upon vast reserves of customer data
   makes it a superior tool for creating tailored experiences for each
   customer. With generative AI, companies can customize customer
   communication plans, building better relationships to facilitate
   swifter payments. AI can also help companies increase customer
   retention by allowing AR teams to focus on providing the best quality
--

Businesses Can Harness AI for a Better AR Strategy

   58%: Share of the most profitable companies since the pandemic’s onset
   that increased their investment AI initiatives One of the hallmarks of
   AI systems is their unique ability to draw information from a wide
   variety of sources and process large quantities of data, on which
   companies increasingly depend to formulate winning business strategies.
   By mining this data trove, AI can assist businesses in unearthing
   trends, patterns and relationships that can inform better
--

   AI can also help predict outcomes for better collection strategies. By
   analyzing customer transactions, credit history and other financial
   data, AI can identify customers at risk of defaulting and help
   proactively create payment plans for them. It can aid in forecasting
--
   The “Working Capital Tracker®,” a collaboration with Billtrust,
   explores how AI can assist AR teams in easing their specific pain
   points to thrive amid economic uncertainty.
--
   Progressive Takes Lead in Latest Provider Ranking of Insurance Apps
   See More In: accounts receivable, AI, AR, artificial intelligence,
   automation, B2B, B2B Payments, Billtrust, commercial payments, Featured
   News, Fraud Prevention, generative artificial intelligence, News,
   payments innovation, PYMNTS Intelligence, PYMNTS News, Technology,
--
   B2B ‘Personas’ Help Identify Payments Frictions and Solutions
   Healthcare’s iPhone Moment: Why Scaling AI-Powered Care Requires a
   Unified OS
--
   [ ] PYMNTS Today
   [ ] Artificial Intelligence
   [ ] Cryptocurrency
