   #The Debrief » Feed The Debrief » Comments Feed alternate alternate
   alternate

     *

   The Debrief The Debrief The Debrief

   Menu logo Menu logo
     * Science
     * Tech
     * Space
     * Defense
     * Aerospace
     * UAP
     * Podcasts
     * Newsletter
     * Submissions
     * About

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   AI Cuneiform AI Cuneiform
   (Image: Wikimedia Commons)

5000-Year-Old Tablets Can Now Be Decoded by Artificial Intelligence, New
Research Reveals

   MJ Banias·November 27, 2023

   A team from Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Johannes
   Gutenberg University Mainz, and Mainz University of Applied Sciences
   has unveiled an AI system capable of deciphering ancient cuneiform
   texts. This novel technology, leveraging 3D models, represents a
   significant advancement in understanding one of humanity’s earliest
   forms of writing.

   Published in The Eurographics Association journal, the researchers’
   study focused on a set of cuneiform tablets from the Frau Professor
   Hilprecht Collection. These tablets primarily originate from ancient
   Mesopotamia, a historical region in present-day Iraq. Often referred to
   as the cradle of civilization, this area is where some of the earliest
   human societies developed. These tablets, in particular, are inscribed
   with a series of symbols, signs, and wedges that form the languages of
   the region, such as Sumerian, Assyrian, and Akkadian.

   Many are over 5,000 years old and offer a glimpse into ancient
   civilizations, covering a wide range of topics from everyday life to
   legal matters.

   “Everything can be found on them: from shopping lists to court
   rulings,” said Hubert Mara, one of the study’s authors. “The tablets
   provide a glimpse into mankind’s past several millennia ago. However,
   they are heavily weathered and thus difficult to decipher even for
   trained eyes.”

   The team turned to AI for help.

   Using a novel AI process to decode ancient cuneiform tablets, they
   leveraged a sophisticated AI model based on the Region-based
   Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN) architecture, a specialized system
   designed for object recognition. The study utilized a unique dataset
   consisting of 3D models of 1,977 cuneiform tablets, with detailed
   annotations of 21,000 cuneiform signs and 4,700 wedges.

   The AI’s methodology entailed a two-part pipeline: initially, a sign
   detector, built on a RepPoints model with a ResNet18 backbone,
   identified cuneiform characters on the tablets. In simple terms, the
   RepPoints model combs through the ResNet18 collection of images
   connected to the Mesopotamian languages and then combines the patterns
   to ‘see’ the text. This step was crucial for locating the signs
   accurately. Subsequently, the wedge detector, using Point R-CNN with
   advanced features like Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) and RoI Align,
   classified and predicted the wedges’ positions, which forms the basis
   of the cuneiform script’s fundamental elements, allowing the AI, in
   effect, to ‘read.’

   These tools take the 3D scans of the tablets and sift through the
   multitude of measurements of things like the impression depth made by
   the stylus into the clay or the distance between the symbols and
   wedges. This nuanced approach enabled the AI to overcome the challenges
   posed by traditional 2D photographs, such as inconsistent lighting and
   color distractions, thus providing a more accurate analysis of the
   ancient texts.

   Traditional research on ancient texts uses optical character
   recognition software (OCR), which converts scanned images or 2D
   photographs of the writing into machine-readable text.

   “OCR usually works with photographs or scans. This is no problem for
   ink on paper or parchment. In the case of cuneiform tablets, however,
   things are more difficult because the light and the viewing angle
   greatly influence how well certain characters can be identified,” said
   co-author Ernst Stötzner.

   antimatter antimatter
   See Also

Scientists Convert Light into Matter and Antimatter, New Study Confirms

   Ancient scrolls, parchment, and old books are easy- they are a 2D
   medium translated into another 2D medium. Cuneiform tablets, however,
   are 3D, and all that depth impacts interpretation.

   To address this, the research team put their AI system through an
   extensive training regimen, utilizing three-dimensional scans and
   supplemental data. A substantial portion of this data was contributed
   by the Mainz University of Applied Sciences, which is currently leading
   a significant project focused on creating 3D models of these ancient
   clay tablets. This enabled the AI to achieve remarkable success in
   accurately identifying the symbols inscribed on the tablets.

   This technology not only democratizes access to these ancient records
   but also opens up new avenues for research, allowing for broader
   analysis and interpretation of historical texts. Future enhancements
   could extend its application to other three-dimensional scripts, such
   as weathered inscriptions found in cemeteries.

   MJ Banias is a journalist and podcaster who covers security and
   technology. He is the host of The Debrief Weekly Report and Cloak &
   Dagger | An OSINT Podcast. You can email MJ at mj@thedebrief.org or
   follow him on Twitter @mjbanias.

   Previous ArticleA Deep Dive into the Anthropology of Searching for ET
   Next Article‘First Ever’ Experiments to Measure Theoretical ‘Quantum
   Flickering’ in an Empty Vacuum Slated for 2024

Related Posts

   invisibility coat invisibility coat

‘Invisibility Coat’ That Hides Humans from AI Security Cameras Developed by
Chinese Students

   Artificial IntelligenceBreaking News

   The Debrief Weekly Report The Debrief Weekly Report

AI Can Read Cuneiform Now

   This week on The Debrief Weekly Report...

   Podcasts

   AI Cuneiform AI Cuneiform

5000-Year-Old Tablets Can Now Be Decoded by Artificial Intelligence, New
Research Reveals

   ArchaeologyArtificial IntelligenceBreaking News

   AI Smart Gun AI Smart Gun

This Breakthrough AI Smart Gun is Designed to Save Lives, Rather Than Take
Them

   Breaking NewsDefenseTech

             © Copyright 2023 The Debrief. All Rights Reserved.


 The thoughts, views, and opinions expressed in articles on this site belong
solely to the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of The Debrief, or
            of other groups or individuals featured on this site.

                                  ADVERTISE


                                   CONTACT


                                    ABOUT

                            EDITORIAL GUIDELINES


                                  COPYRIGHT


                                   PRIVACY

     * Send a News Tip
     * The Intelligence Brief
     * Get Our Newsletter

   The Debrief The Debrief The Debrief

     * Science
     * Tech
     * Space
     * Defense
     * Aerospace
     * UAP
     * Podcasts
     * Newsletter
     * Submissions
     * About

     *
     *

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   Type to search or hit ESC to close
   See all results
