   Skip to main content
   Exclusive news, data and analytics for financial market
   professionalsLearn more aboutRefinitiv
   Reuters home
     * World (BUTTON)
     * Business (BUTTON)
     * Markets (BUTTON)
     * Sustainability (BUTTON)
     * Legal (BUTTON)
     * Breakingviews
     * Technology (BUTTON)
     * Investigations
     * (BUTTON) More

   (BUTTON) My View
   (BUTTON)
   Register
   (BUTTON)
     * Disrupted

Exclusive: Germany, France and Italy reach agreement on future AI regulation

   By Andreas Rinke
   November 20, 20239:18 PM UTCUpdated ago
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   (BUTTON)
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   Illustration shows AI (Artificial Intelligence) letters and computer
   motherboard

   AI (Artificial Intelligence) letters are placed on computer motherboard
   in this illustration taken June 23, 2023. REUTERS/Dado
   Ruvic/Illustration/File Photo Acquire Licensing Rights
     * Summary

     * No sanctions should be imposed, joint paper says
     * Commitments would involve large and small providers
     * Paper suggests "mandatory self-regulation through codes of conduct"

   BERLIN, Nov 18 (Reuters) - France, Germany and Italy have reached an
   agreement on how artificial intelligence should be regulated, according
   to a joint paper seen by Reuters, which is expected to accelerate
   negotiations at the European level.

   The three governments support "mandatory self-regulation through codes
   of conduct" for so-called foundation models of AI, which are designed
   to produce a broad range of outputs. But they oppose "un-tested norms."

   "Together we underline that the AI Act regulates the application of AI
   and not the technology as such," the joint paper said. "The inherent
   risks lie in the application of AI systems rather than in the
   technology itself."

   The European Commission, the European Parliament and the EU Council are
   negotiating how the bloc should position itself on this topic.

   The paper explains that developers of foundation models would have to
   define model cards, which are used to provide information about a
   machine learning model.

   "The model cards shall include the relevant information to understand
   the functioning of the model, its capabilities and its limits and will
   be based on best practices within the developers community," the paper
   said.

   "An AI governance body could help to develop guidelines and could check
   the application of model cards," the joint paper said.

   Initially, no sanctions should be imposed, the paper said.

   If violations of the code of conduct are identified after a certain
   period of time, however, a system of sanctions could be set up.

   Germany's Economy Ministry, which is in charge of the topic together
   with the Ministry of Digital Affairs, said laws and state control
   should not regulate AI itself, but rather its application.

   Digital Affairs Minister Volker Wissing told Reuters he was very
   pleased an agreement had been reached with France and Germany to limit
   only the use of AI.

   "We need to regulate the applications and not the technology if we want
   to play in the top AI league worldwide," Wissing said.

   State Secretary for Economic Affairs Franziska Brantner told Reuters it
   was crucial to harness the opportunities and limit the risks.

   "We have developed a proposal that can ensure a balance between both
   objectives in a technological and legal terrain that has not yet been
   defined," Brantner said.

   As governments around the world seek to capture the economic benefits
   of AI, Britain in November hosted its first AI safety summit.

   The German government is hosting a digital summit in Jena, in the state
   of Thuringia, on Monday and Tuesday that will bring together
   representatives from politics, business and science.

   Issues surrounding AI will also be on the agenda when the German and
   Italian governments hold talks in Berlin on Wednesday.

   Reporting by Andreas Rinke; Writing by Maria Martinez; Editing by Mike
   Harrison, Barbara Lewis and Diane Craft

   Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   Acquire Licensing Rights, opens new tab

Read Next

     * Long March-2F carrier rocket, carrying Shenzhou-14 spacecraft and
       three astronauts, takes off from Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center
       Disruptedcategory

China successfully launches a pilot reusable spacecraft, state media report
       August 5, 2022
     * New Apple products go on sale at flagship Apple Store in New York
       Disruptedcategory

Apple forecasts faster sales growth, strong iPhone demand despite glum
economy
       July 29, 2022
     * Facebook's new rebrand logo Meta is seen on smartpone in front of
       displayed logo of Facebook, Messenger, Intagram, Whatsapp, Oculus
       in this illustration taken
       Disruptedcategory

Meta posts first-ever revenue drop as inflation throttles ad sales
       July 28, 2022
     * YouTube logo in Los Angeles
       Disruptedcategory

YouTube's quarter shows problems Meta may face: TikTok, weakening economy
       July 28, 2022

   LSEG Workspace

More from Reuters

Technology

     * An illuminated Google logo is seen inside an office building in
       Zurich

Canada, Google strike deal to keep news in search results
       Technologycategory · November 29, 2023
       Canada and Google have reached a deal to keep news stories in
       search results and for the internet giant to pay C$100 million
       ($73.6 million) annually to news publishers in the country, a
       Canadian official said on Wednesday.
     * A man types into a keyboard during the Def Con hacker convention in
       Las Vegas
       Future of Moneycategory

Digital bank robberies key risk for central bank e-money, BIS report warns
       November 29, 2023
     * Broadcom Limited company logo is pictured on an office building in
       Rancho Bernardo, California
       Disruptedcategory

Broadcom adds silicon AI features to speed new Trident networking chip
       2:05 PM UTC · Updated ago
     * The company logo for Snowflake Inc. is displayed on a banner to
       celebrate the company's IPO at the NYSE in New York
       Technologycategory

Snowflake sees product revenue above estimates on AI-driven demand
       November 29, 2023
     * The U.S Treasury building in Washington.
       Technologycategory

US sanctions cryptocurrency mixer Sinbad over alleged North Korea ties
       November 29, 2023

Site Index

Browse

     * World
     * Business
     * Markets
     * Sustainability
     * Legal
     * Breakingviews
     * Technology
     * Investigations, opens new tab
     * Sports
     * Science
     * Lifestyle

About Reuters

     * About Reuters, opens new tab
     * Careers, opens new tab
     * Reuters News Agency, opens new tab
     * Brand Attribution Guidelines, opens new tab
     * Reuters Leadership, opens new tab
     * Reuters Fact Check, opens new tab
     * Reuters Diversity Report, opens new tab

Stay Informed

     * Download the App (iOS), opens new tab
     * Download the App (Android), opens new tab
     * Newsletters, opens new tab

Information you can trust

   Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s
   largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide
   every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and
   international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's
   media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.

Follow Us

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Thomson Reuters Products

     * Westlaw, opens new tab
       Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content,
       attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.
     * Onesource, opens new tab
       The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and
       ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.
     * Checkpoint, opens new tab
       The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and
       finance professionals.

LSEG Products

     * Workspace, opens new tab
       Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a
       highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.
     * Data Catalogue, opens new tab
       Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market
       data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
     * World-Check, opens new tab
       Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help
       uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.

     * Advertise With Us, opens new tab
     * Advertising Guidelines, opens new tab
     * Coupons, opens new tab
     * Acquire Licensing Rights, opens new tab

     * Cookies, opens new tab
     * Terms of Use, opens new tab
     * Privacy, opens new tab
     * Digital Accessibility, opens new tab
     * Corrections, opens new tab
     * Site Feedback, opens new tab

   All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete
   list of exchanges and delays.

   © 2023 Reuters. All rights reserved
