   #alternate alternate alternate Global News Artificial Intelligence:
   Canada’s future of everything Feed Global News Feed

   Skip to Main Content
   Global News Home
   Share this item on Facebook Share this item on Twitter (BUTTON) See
   more sharing options

   (BUTTON) Full Menu
   Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode [ ]
   Light Dark

Menu (BUTTON) Close

   ____________________ (BUTTON) Submit Search

Topics

     * Watch
     * World
     * Canada
     * Local (BUTTON) Change location
     * Politics
     * Money
     * Health
     * Entertainment
     * Lifestyle
     * Perspectives
     * Sports
     * Commentary
     * Contests
     * Podcasts
     * U.S. News

TV Programs

     * Global National
     * West Block
     * The Morning Show
     * Video Centre
     * More…

Connect

     * Email alerts
     * Alexa
     * Breaking News Alerts from Global News
     * License Content
     * Contact Us

   National
   (BUTTON) Change Close (BUTTON) Change Close
     * Barrie
     * BC
     * Calgary
     * Durham
     * Edmonton
     * Guelph
     * Halifax
     * Hamilton
     * Kingston
     * Kitchener
     * Lethbridge
     * London
     * Montreal
     * New Brunswick
     * Okanagan
     * Ottawa
     * Peterborough
     * Regina
     * Saskatoon
     * Toronto
     * Winnipeg

   Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News
   Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global
   News on TikTok Global News on Telegram

(BUTTON) (BUTTON) Close Local

your local region

   National
     * Barrie
     * BC
     * Calgary
     * Durham
     * Edmonton
     * Guelph
     * Halifax
     * Hamilton
     * Kingston
     * Kitchener
     * Lethbridge
     * London
     * Montreal
     * New Brunswick
     * Okanagan
     * Ottawa
     * Peterborough
     * Regina
     * Saskatoon
     * Toronto
     * Winnipeg

Share (BUTTON)

   Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter
   Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp
   whatsapp Share this item on Flipboard flipboard (BUTTON) Share this
   item on LinkedIn linkedin Share this item on Reddit reddit (BUTTON)
   Copy article link Copy link

Search (BUTTON)

   ____________________ (BUTTON) Submit search

Quick Search

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Trending Now

     *

     *

     *

     *

     *

     *

Comments (BUTTON) Close comments menu

   Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first.

   (BUTTON)
   Click to scroll back to top of the page Back
   to top

Artificial Intelligence: Canada’s future of everything

   Artificial Intelligence
   By Megan Robinson & Mike Drolet Global News
   Published November 25, 2023
   16 min read

   If you get Global News from Instagram or Facebook - that will be
   changing. Find out how you can still connect with us.
   (BUTTON) Hide message bar
   Click to play video: 'Artificial Intelligence: Canada’s future of
   everything'
   11:49 Artificial Intelligence: Canada’s future of everything
   WATCH: Artificial Intelligence is on the brink of revolutionizing
   virtually every facet of human existence and Canada is on the leading
   edge, from healthcare and education to airlines and entertainment. For
   The New Reality, Mike Drolet explores some of the critical risks and
   the need for guardrails. And we take viewers inside how AI is improving
   our daily lives in ways that often remain undetectable – and certainly
   unimaginable just a few years ago – Nov 25, 2023

   Blink and you’ll get left behind.

   The AI revolution is here and it’s changing the world faster than
   anybody could have predicted.

   Whether that’s for better or worse depends on whom you ask. What’s
   undeniable is this — the only limitation on how AI will transform the
   world is us.

   Geoffrey Hinton, the so-called grandfather of AI, issued warnings this
   year, sounding the alarm about the existential threat of AI.

   In May 2023, he appeared in an article on the front page of The New
   York Times, announcing he had quit his job at Google to speak freely
   about the harm he believes AI will cause humanity.

   “The way that we propose and strategize technologies rarely, if ever,
   turn out,” said Isabel Pedersen, author and professor at Ontario Tech
   University focusing on the social implications of emergent
   technologies.

   If Hinton is having a come-to-Jesus moment, he might be too late. Over
   100 Million people use ChatGPT, a form of AI using technology he
   invented. That’s on top of the way AI is already interwoven into
   practically everything we do online.

   And while Toronto-based Hinton is one of the Canadian minds leading
   this industry — one which is growing exponentially — the circle of AI
   innovators remains small.
   Geoffrey Hinton, known as the "Godfather of AI," leaves the stage after
   speaking at the Collision conference in Toronto on Wednesday, June 28,
   2023. View image in full screen
   Geoffrey Hinton, known as the ‘Godfather of AI,’ leaves the stage after
   speaking at the Collision conference in Toronto on June 28. THE
   CANADIAN PRESS / Chris Young

   So small, in fact, that while filming for this story in Toronto’s Eaton
   Centre, our Global News team happened upon Hamayal Choudhry, founder
   and CEO of smartARM, the world’s first bionic arm for which AI uses
   cameras to dictate movement.
   Advertisement

   Unknowingly, we asked him for an interview about the latest release and
   quickly learned, this was no ordinary shopper.

   Choudhry was in the store testing the glasses out for himself, curious
   to see if AI could be as big a disruptor in the world of glasses as he
   intends to make it in the world of prosthetics.

   “The same way those glasses have tiny cameras in the frames, that’s
   what we’re doing for our prosthetic arms,” Choudhry said, in an
   informal interview in the mall concourse.

   smartARM is just one of many examples of how AI is on the brink of
   revolutionizing virtually every facet of human existence. Canada is on
   the leading edge, utilizing what AI can do from healthcare and
   education to airlines and entertainment.

   There are inherent risks with AI and a lack of regulation and oversight
   in Canada, but overall, AI is improving our daily lives in ways that
   may often remain undetectable.
   Hamayal Choudhry, founder and CEO of Canadian company smartARM, is
   trying on the new Ray-Ban AI glasses using Meta technology. He's got
   dark hair and is wearing a dark, long sleeved shirt. Choudhry happened
   to be in the store when the Global News team for The New Reality was
   testing out the demo models and they got to chatting. View image in
   full screen
   Hamayal Choudhry, founder and CEO of Canadian company smartARM, tries
   on the new Ray-Ban AI glasses using Meta technology. Choudhry happened
   to be in the store when the Global News team for The New Reality was
   testing out the demo models and they got to chatting. Brent Rose /
   Global News

   Canada’s AI pioneering dates back to the 1970s, when researchers formed
   the world’s first national AI association.

   The Canadian Artificial Intelligence Association (CAIAC) formerly known
   as the Canadian Society for the Computational Studies of Intelligence,
   held its first “official” meeting in 1973.

   Its own mission statement says the CAIAC aims to “foster excellence and
   leadership in research, development and education in Canada’s
   artificial intelligence community by facilitating the exchange of
   knowledge through various media and venues.”

   It held its first annual conference in 1976, three years before the
   American Association for Artificial Intelligence was founded.

   “Conferences helped with collaboration and community-building,
   especially in those early days when remote work did not exist and even
   phone calls were expensive. When you look at the earlier proceedings,
   you will see a pool of talent that was leading the world in AI,” said
   Denilson Barbosa, current CAIAC president.

   The society has had different publications over the years, including a
   magazine and newsletters, first published in 1974.

   Its archive is a treasure trove of AI history. Its magazine debut in
   1984 talks about the potential and the influence of AI: “It is
   predictable that, awakening to their new place in the sun, AIers be
   distracted by sycophants, charlatans, and barmecides. Does the AIer
   grow frustrated with misconceptions about AI? You bet we do.”
   An excerpt from the September 1984 edition of the CAIAC Magazine. View
   image in full screen
   An excerpt from the September 1984 edition of the CAIAC Magazine.
   Canadian Artificial Intelligence Association

   Barbosa is a professor of computing science at the University of
   Alberta. Speaking by phone from Edmonton, Barbosa acknowledged that
   while Canada is slow to fully integrate AI, conservative in investing
   and implementing new technologies, he’s looking forward to the
   possibilities of AI in learning in school or for personal growth,
   including AI in classrooms.

   “The way we teach is fairly passive. Instructors have a huge influence
   on the success of students and control the pace of the process. It
   would be best to turn things around and let the students drive the
   process — they would work on their own, and when they got stuck, they
   would get help from an always-available AI,” Barbosa said.

   “Human instructors would be there to oversee the process and provide
   extra help to those who need it the most.”
   People take photos of an AI robot at the All In Artificial Intelligence
   conference on Sept. 27 in Montreal. View image in full screen
   People take photos of an AI robot at the All In Artificial Intelligence
   conference on Sept. 27 in Montreal. THE CANADIAN PRESS / Ryan Remiorz

   When most people think of AI, robots from movies — who can think for
   themselves — come to mind. That’s known as deep learning AI, found in
   the software of autonomous cars, facial recognition, mass surveillance
   and yes, some robots. It’s the AI that has the potential to think for
   itself and that scares a lot of people.
   Advertisement

   Then there’s the field where Canada is considered a leader: the broader
   technology of machine learning AI, which most people don’t realize we
   already use every day. It curates social media feeds, translates
   languages, detects fraudulent bank transactions, makes song and movie
   recommendations, and more. It’s driven by human input and our habits.

   Under the umbrella of machine learning, is Generative AI. It generates
   new content that mimics the data it was trained on.

   “Think of a program that has been trained with vast amounts of
   information, information that exists all over the Internet. And it
   develops an understanding and a representation of what this information
   is all about,” Deloitte Canada’s Jas Jaaj told Global News’ The New
   Reality.

   “Generative AI allows you to tune the information in a way where now
   you can actually consume the information the way you want to based on
   your values, based on your preferences. And then you can ask all sorts
   of questions to be able to get things like recommendations, things like
   suggestions of what you may want to have for a meal.”

   Most Canadians can’t tell what’s human or AI. A study released in
   October by the Canadian Journalism Foundation found that half of us are
   not confident in distinguishing the difference between social media
   content generated by AI compared with content created by humans.

   This unknown is leading to a lot of fear and misinformation about what
   AI is and isn’t doing. But whether we’re ready, it’s poised to change
   nearly everything we do and Canada is already playing a leading role.
   Deval Pandya, wearing glasses, sitting for an interview. View image in
   full screen
   Deval Pandya, vice president of AI engineering at Vector Institute, is
   passionate about the role of digital technologies in accelerating
   energy transition and Energy equity, as well as about building machine
   learning teams and products for social good. Brent Rose / Global News

   In 2017, the federal government put $125 million of funding into AI,
   the first country to have a national AI strategy. The funding helped to
   create three world-renowned institutes to guide development in AI
   research in Montreal, Edmonton, and Toronto, and put Canada among the
   top five nations in the field.

   “For me, the biggest risk is not adopting AI and realizing its maximum
   potential,” said Deval Pandya, vice-president of AI engineering at
   Toronto’s Vector Institute, one of the institutes founded in 2017.
   “AI is a transformative technology that is going to make [the] world a
   much better place and help us solve some of the most pressing
   challenges as a society that we face right now.”

   He’s personally bet on Canada’s future. Pandya, originally from India,
   joined Vector Institute nearly three years ago, after working in the
   U.S.

   “I think it’s very bright. And if it wasn’t bright, I wouldn’t move to
   Canada,” Pandya said.

   Vector Institute is an independent non-profit dedicated to AI research.
   It has partnerships with 20 university programs in Ontario with
   training focused on AI, providing startups with a steady stream of new
   workers.

   “Last year, we graduated more than a thousand Vector-recognized master
   students. And what is very impressive is that 90 per cent of the
   students stay in Canada, in Ontario, after they graduate,” Pandya said.
   Jas Jaaj is sitting at a table during an interview. View image in full
   screen
   Jas Jaaj, Deloitte Canada’s managing partner of AI and data, oversees a
   team of AI strategists, data scientists, machine learning engineers,
   data engineers, and risk specialists. Brent Rose / Global News

   You don’t have to look far from the Vector Institute to see AI’s
   evolution.

   Jas Jaaj, a managing partner at Deloitte in Toronto who focuses on AI
   and data, believes AI will be to the 21st century what the steam engine
   was to the 18th century, what electricity was to the 19th century, and
   what personal computers were to the 20th century.

   “You know what really happened in all of these major developments?
   Every major industry changed, societies changed,” Jaaj said.

   Professional services firms like Deloitte help companies find the next
   big thing. And these days, it doesn’t get bigger than AI.

   Global News got an exclusive look at one of the ways AI will change
   health care. It’s an AI nurse, assigned to newly discharged patients to
   help track their recovery care plan and progress.
   Advertisement

   It was created in partnership between Deloitte and The Ottawa Hospital
   and received positive feedback when it was rolled out in the testing
   phase.
   This virtual nurse, powered by AI, was designed in partnership between
   Deloitte Canada and The Ottawa Hospital. It will follow up on post-op
   requirements with patients at home — a time-intensive yet necessary
   task. When a complex medical problem is flagged a human nurse steps in.
   View image in full screen
   This virtual nurse, powered by AI, was designed in partnership between
   Deloitte Canada and The Ottawa Hospital. It will follow up on post-op
   requirements with patients at home — a time-intensive yet necessary
   task. When a complex medical problem is flagged a human nurse steps in.
   The Ottawa Hospital, Deloitte Canada

   Each AI nurse is unique to the patient. It has the information it
   requires to converse with a patient about their care and its skin tone,
   even the language and dialect it speaks, can be altered to put a
   patient at ease.

   During the demo for Global News, the AI nurse asked: “Regarding your
   post-discharge medications, Tenzin and Lasix, do you have any questions
   or concerns about them, how to take them or any potential side
   effects?”

   The responses given by the patient trigger another series of questions.
   It will ask if you’ve weighed yourself, how you’re feeling, and more,
   as a way to ensure post-op instructions are being followed. And if it’s
   interacting with a stubborn patient, it will push back.

   “They could be a bit insistent in terms of saying, ‘Hey, you know what?
   You haven’t done what you were supposed to do, so get on with it,’”
   Jaaj said.

   Most importantly, the AI nurse is smart enough to flag problems for a
   human nurse or doctor to intercede.

   The goal of the AI nurse isn’t to replace human nurses, it’s to take
   tasks off their already full plates and allow them to perform
   higher-value work with more time. It can also lower readmission rates.
   Jaaj predicts 100 per cent of Canadian hospitals will begin to use AI
   in some way within the next few years.

   Regardless of the goal, it doesn’t stop one of the biggest concerns
   about progress in integrating AI into the Canadian workforce: job
   losses.

   “This is a hot topic in terms of the anxiety that some people have,”
   Jaaj said. “The way to think about it is not in a way by which it will
   replace workers. Rather, it will reshape the workforce as we move
   forward.”
   Bruce Stamm, managing director of enterprise data and artificial
   intelligence at Air Canada, says the airline is using AI to optimize
   its flight scheduling. Next year, it hopes to also integrate AI into
   the maintenance schedule. View image in full screen
   Bruce Stamm, managing director of enterprise data and artificial
   intelligence at Air Canada, says the airline is using AI to optimize
   its flight scheduling. Next year, it hopes to also integrate AI into
   the maintenance schedule. Brent Rose / Global News

   While progress will have its casualties, Canada is very much in a
   position of relying on human input to use AI. AI can take on
   time-consuming tasks, freeing us up to solve more complicated problems.

   That’s what Air Canada is doing, on a mission to overhaul and
   streamline its entire company by taking advantage of the power and
   efficiency AI creates. Its biggest challenge is tackling the thing we
   all hate most: delays.

   “In terms of the complexity of getting our passengers safely to where
   they want to be on time, a lot of things have to go right,” said Bruce
   Stamm, Air Canada’s managing director of enterprise data and artificial
   intelligence.

   “There are literally 60 things which need to go right for an aircraft
   to land on time. Only 30 of those do we actually control as an
   airline.”

   When it works, the chaos of air travel seems like a synchronized
   symphony in the sky. Canada’s largest air carrier is timing the
   takeoffs and landings of more than 1,100 daily flights in such a way
   that 140,000 passengers get to where they want to be unhindered by
   delays or lost bags.

   But the truth is, frustrations are all too common. Even a 10-minute
   delay of a flight at the beginning of the day can cause a ripple
   effect.

   Nearly 28 per cent of Air Canada flights, or more than 8,700, landed
   late in October 2023, placing the company ninth out of 10 airlines on
   the continent in on-time performance, according to aviation data
   company Cirium.
   Air Canada Scheduling Optimizer View image in full screen
   Canada’s largest air carrier is timing the takeoffs and landings of
   more than 1,100 daily flights in such a way that 140,000 passengers get
   to where they want to be unhindered by delays or lost bags. But the
   truth is, frustrations are all too common. Air Canada is hoping the use
   of AI will help. Brent Rose / Global News

   In late October, Stamm’s team started using AI to optimize its
   scheduling and predict delays. The program uses historical data and
   looks at scheduling three to five years in advance. Instead of the old
   way of doing things, using theoretical predictions about flight times,
   cleaning, maintenance, and more, Air Canada is able to devise a more
   accurate schedule.
   Advertisement

   Global News got a first look at the company’s Montreal headquarters.

   The software doesn’t seem like much — coloured boxes on a screen — but
   it churns through massive amounts of data, faster and more efficiently
   than a person could.

   “AI and data are going to be part of our DNA just to do a lot more
   effective decision-making,” Stamm said.

   Next year, Air Canada plans to use AI to modernize its maintenance
   schedule for its fleet of about 200 planes. It will take into
   consideration where planes and mechanics are located, ordering time for
   parts, and more. The best part? What currently takes people weeks to do
   will soon be done in about 15 minutes, allowing for work a computer
   can’t do to become the priority.

   “Air Canada is embracing this, leveraging this to the better of our
   employees’ experience and ultimately our passengers’ experience,” Stamm
   said. “It’s awesome. And it’s also fun.”
   Hamayal Choudhry, founder and CEO of Toronto-based smartARM, started
   the company about four years ago, after winning a 2018 competition
   beating out 50,000 other inventors. View image in full screen
   Hamayal Choudhry, founder and CEO of Toronto-based smartARM, started
   the company about four years ago, after winning a 2018 competition
   beating out 50,000 other inventors. Brent Rose / Global News

   While Canada’s largest corporations are harnessing new technology,
   small startups are also launching very quickly. In the last year,
   hundreds of Canadian AI startups have hit the market.

   A couple of weeks after Global News met Choudhry, he and smartARM
   co-founder Evan Neff, invited the Global News’ crew to their Toronto
   office, a small area in a coworking building east of downtown, which
   also holds their first prototypes.

   Choudhry started smartARM about four years ago, shortly after beating
   out 50,000 other inventors at a competition sponsored by Microsoft in
   2018. He had learned that prosthetics were either cheap but clunky, or
   functional but expensive.

   Neff tells Global News, smartARM’s goal is to enhance autonomy and
   accessibility in the prosthetic space.
   Hamayal Choudhry (left) and Evan Neff (right) holding smartARM
   prototypes. The startup is dedicated to empowering people with limb
   differences. View image in full screen
   Hamayal Choudhry (left) and Evan Neff (right) holding smartARM
   prototypes. The startup is dedicated to empowering people with limb
   differences. smartARM

   Choudhry and Neff aren’t specifying their price point yet, Neff said
   current market prices range from about $30,000 to $200,000 making
   high-quality prosthetics inaccessible to roughly 95 per cent of the
   upper-limb different community.

   “We aim to change this,” Neff said.

   “For those with insurance or funding, smartARM will remain affordable,
   minimizing out-of-pocket expenses. For others, we’re pricing smartARM
   comparably to a smartphone or laptop, not a car.”

   smartARM set out to design something affordable and remarkable.

   It mimics human tendencies, like hand-eye coordination, holding items,
   carrying heavy objects and lifting delicate ones. Using AI, Choudry
   said the prosthesis will inherently “know” how to handle something —
   “just like the way you would look at an object … and grab it. You won’t
   necessarily think about how you wrap your fingers around it.”

   smartARM isn’t for sale yet, with regulatory certifications and
   approvals pending. In the meantime, Choudhry and Neff are testing it on
   people with a limb difference, including former NFL player Shaquem
   Griffin.
   In May 2023, smartARM announced a partnership with former NFL player
   Shaquem Griffin. View image in full screen
   In May 2023, smartARM announced a partnership with former NFL player
   Shaquem Griffin. smartARM / Shaquem Griffin

   Griffin was born with a rare condition forcing the amputation of his
   left hand when he was four years old. He made NFL history when he was
   drafted by the Seattle Seahawks in 2018 and went on to play for the
   Miami Dolphins before retiring in 2022 after four seasons in the
   league.

   Choudhry sent a private message to Griffin on Instagram late last year
   and it wasn’t long before Choudhry and Neff travelled to meet Griffin
   and his mother.
   Advertisement

   The first time he put on a smartARM and interacted with it, they were
   sitting down for dinner at a restaurant.

   Choudhry recalls Griffin repeatedly picking up and putting down a glass
   of water, taking a drink, and passing it to different people at the
   table. Choudhry and Neff witnessed Griffin use his left hand for the
   first time as an adult.

   “Shaquem has proven that having a limb difference doesn’t mean that you
   are any less capable of greatness,” Neff said.

   “We want to stress that smartARM isn’t about necessity; it’s simply
   about empowering our users with more choices and independence. Watching
   Shaquem explore new possibilities with smartARM was a testament to our
   mission.”

   smartARM also made its New York Fashion Week debut in 2023, showcased
   by Griffin at the Runway of Dreams, highlighting inclusivity through
   fashion and beauty.

   “Just looking at their expressions and looking at how they interact
   with it so intuitively and naturally is inexplicably rewarding for us
   to see,” Choudhry said of the users testing smartARM. “You know, it
   makes coming in here and working every day not even really seem like
   work.”
   Isabel Pedersen sits for an interview with Global News' The New Reality
   at Ontario Tech University. View image in full screen
   Isabel Pedersen during an interview with Global News’ The New Reality
   at Ontario Tech University. Pedersen, a professor, author, and lab
   director, has more than 20 years of experience in researching AI and
   wearable technologies. Brent Rose / Global News

   Pedersen has been studying wearable technology for over 20 years. Even
   she is amazed at how fast AI has become embedded in our daily lives.

   “People went from never experiencing AI themselves to being able to use
   it on their phones, to use it on their laptops, use it at work, use it
   at home,” she said.

   “We’ve gone through this rapid process in a matter of weeks that in
   some ways other technologies took 100 years.”

   In addition to her role as a professor at Ontario Tech University,
   Pedersen is the founding director of the Digital Life Institute. It’s
   an international research network studying the social implications of
   emergent digital technologies.

   Pedersen said inventors are still developing and designing a future
   that hasn’t happened yet.

   “We have to be careful of techno-solution-ism. For me to say that
   you’re going to have a technology that is going to solve these very
   difficult problems — it won’t,” Pedersen said.

   “I do believe that we have to continue to move forward and try to
   design ethical outcomes at the earliest stages so that we can
   presuppose some of these harms that are ongoing that we might face.”
   Francois-Philippe Champagne View image in full screen
   Innovation, Science and Industry Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne
   gestures to a reporter as he responds to a question during a news
   conference on Oct. 24, 2023, in Ottawa. THE CANADIAN PRESS / Adrian
   Wyld

   As with everything related to new technology, there are persistent
   concerns that AI is moving much faster than the guardrails being built
   for it.

   The federal government has a framework for proposed legislation, but
   The Artificial Intelligence and Data Act won’t come into force before
   2025. Federal Minister of Innovation, Science, and Industry,
   François-Philippe Champagne, told Global News the government wants to
   get it done right.

   “There’s an acknowledgment that we need to deal with the concerns and
   the risks so that we can realize the opportunities. And in order to do
   that, we need framework, we need guardrails, so we build trust with
   people,” Champagne said.

   But trust can be tricky. Until the act becomes law, the government
   released a voluntary code of conduct in late September for generative
   AI developers. In the absence of regulation, it is supposed to guide
   organizations to come up with an environment to self-regulate.

   “It is incumbent on organizations and businesses themselves to not only
   wait for things like regulations and these types of directives coming
   in, but also go down the path of really understanding how they can
   self-regulate in the interim by educating themselves and learning about
   how this technology will really make a difference,” Jaaj said.

   “At the end of the day, you have to take a multi-pronged approach to
   not be left behind while everyone else is going to be doing this
   anyway.”
   Advertisement
   Journalistic standards (BUTTON) Comment Report an error
   © 2023 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc.

Credits

     * Top video of smartARM
       Brent Rose

     * After playing the lottery for 30 years, Toronto man finally wins
       big
       Canada
     * Newfoundland physician calls out racism in small community, vows to
       counter it
       Canada
     * ‘I just didn’t feel good’: Montreal mayor speaks about health
       scare, slowing down
       Canada

Report an Error

   (BUTTON)

   AdChoices

   Global News Home

   Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News
   Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global
   News on TikTok Global News on Telegram

     * About
     * Principles & Practices
     * Branded Content
     * Contact us
     * RSS
     * Newsletters
     * Notifications
     * Smart home
     * Advertisers Election Registry
     * Global News Licensing Requests
     * (BUTTON) Cookie consent

   ©2023 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News.
   All rights reserved.

   Corus Entertainment Home

     * Privacy Policy
     * Copyright
     * Terms of Use
     * Advertise
     * Advertising Standards Terms
     * Corus Entertainment
     * Accessibility
