   #Will Artificial Intelligence Bring About The End Of Smartphone Apps? -
   RSS

   Subscribe to newsletters
   Subscribe: $29.99/year
   (BUTTON) Sign In
   (BUTTON)
   BETA
   This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here

More From Forbes

   Nov 27, 2023,08:36am EST
   How Ally Financial Is Delivering Business Value From Generative AI
   Nov 20, 2023,10:45am EST
   Quantum Artificial Intelligence Is Closer Than You Think
   Nov 20, 2023,09:00am EST
   Clorox Scapegoats Cyber Chief, Rewards Board After Crisis
   Nov 16, 2023,03:06pm EST
   AI Ethics Essentials: Lawsuit Over AI Denial of Healthcare
   Nov 7, 2023,03:12pm EST
   XREA And Information Services In The AI Age
   Nov 7, 2023,02:59pm EST
   How Should Corporate Boards Be Thinking About Generative AI?
   Nov 6, 2023,10:46pm EST
   AI In Healthcare: Four Key Directives From The Biden Administration
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Edit Story
   ForbesLeadershipCIO Network

Will Artificial Intelligence Bring About The End Of Smartphone Apps?

   Jonathan Reichental, PhD
   Contributor
   Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
   I write about the role of technology in business and society.
   Following
   Click to save this article.
   You'll be asked to sign into your Forbes account.
   Got it
   Nov 25, 2023,03:20pm EST
     * Share to Facebook
     * Share to Twitter
     * Share to Linkedin

   Is it game-over for apps?
   getty

   When Steve Jobs announced the first iPhone in 2007, accelerating the
   smartphone revolution, the game changing device shipped with just a
   small set of Apple-produced apps. There was no software development kit
   (SDK) for third parties to develop apps yet and obviously no app store
   too. All that changed in early 2008 when the floodgates for app
   development were opened.

   Since then millions of smartphone apps have been built both for the
   iPhone and Android devices and their impact on society has been nothing
   short of revolutionary.

   But could the app economy be coming to an end?

   The recent explosion of innovation in artificial intelligence (AI) and
   particularly generative AI suggests that the potential conditions for a
   post-app era might be ahead. It could usher in completely new ways to
   engage with our devices and for enterprises to deliver products and
   services.

   The idea that the days of apps are numbered is not a new topic. In
   fact, for over a decade, observers have been suggesting that an app — a
   standalone software application on a screen of icons that must be
   located, opened, and engaged with — isn’t the most optimum experience.

   Today, some features on a smartphone don’t require these kinds of
   actions. You can read—and if necessary—respond to a pushed
   notification, thus avoiding the app altogether. Security can be managed
   by the device simply looking at your face. Siri and Android’s Google
   Assistant use voice commands to locate and produce results such as
   driving directions and playing music.
   MORE FROMFORBES ADVISOR

Best High-Yield Savings Accounts Of September 2023

   By
   Kevin Payne
   Contributor

Best 5% Interest Savings Accounts of September 2023

   By
   Cassidy Horton
   Contributor

   Smartwatches, which provide many non-app capabilities haven’t displaced
   the ubiquity of apps, although their remarkable popularity provides an
   obvious hint that users are open to new ways of engaging with
   technology.

   Despite these innovations, use of apps continues to be the dominant
   interface between users and their mobile devices.

   Smartphones are massively popular, with over six billion in use across
   the world. When using their mobile devices, American’s spend 88 percent
   of their time using apps. Games make up a large portion of that
   percentage, followed by business, education, and lifestyle uses.

   Apps have changed how we consume information and entertainment, buy
   things, and even how we find a date. For enterprises, apps provide a
   whole new channel for business. A company without at least one app is
   an outlier today and it may be an omission that is costing it real
   dollars in lost opportunity.

   How is it conceivable that the dominance of standalone, installed apps
   could be toppled from their leading position? One central answer comes
   down to whether there is a superior alternative.

   Smartphones and apps have consolidated popular needs into a single
   interface. The list is large and includes common capabilities such as
   getting directions, paying for things, playing games, consuming
   information, taking pictures, recording video, and a lot more. There’s
   no doubt this transition has been game changing. Pick up your phone,
   locate or download an app, and you’re in business.

   But what if you didn’t need to locate an app and instead your needs
   were simply met by a voice command, or better yet, your device learned
   about you and anticipated your needs, taking care of them for you?

   All of a sudden, apps might seem overly burdensome. With a device this
   smart, there would be no need to think about which app to use, locate
   and open it on a device, learn and remember how to use it, and then run
   through its many steps. In this way, a notable layer of overhead would
   be removed. Technology would melt into the background and become
   largely invisible.

   What I’m describing is a post-app world that is driven by increasingly
   capable AI. It’s a future where devices become a connection to your own
   personal assistant.

   Bill Gates, former CEO of Microsoft, has been writing about the future
   of software and the notion of software-enabled personal assistants,
   what he calls agents, for over 30 years. It’s only now that we’ve
   reached the enabling technology though advances in AI, that his
   predictions are beginning to be realized. In his words, “You won’t have
   to use different apps for different tasks. You’ll simply tell your
   device, in everyday language, what you want to do. And depending on how
   much information you choose to share with it, the software will be able
   to respond personally because it will have a rich understanding of your
   life.”

   In a post-app world, even smartphones may be redundant. Humane, a San
   Francisco-based startup, have developed the Ai Pin. It’s a small
   wearable device worn like a lapel pin, a little bigger than an Apple
   Airpods charging case, that responds to voice and hand gestures. It has
   no screen but can project text and images onto a person’s hand. The
   developers maintain it has all the features of a smartphone but without
   the screen. The Ai Pin provides us with a glimpse of what’s next and
   the possibilities of a completely new marketplace.

   There’s no question that what I’m positing here is disruptive. We live
   in a world of millions of apps and app developers that generate
   billions of dollars each year. A post-app, or software agent world will
   drive enormous and often uncomfortable change in such a large and
   complex industry. It will also require organizations to rethink and
   reinvent how they engage with customers. But as one age leads to
   another, more opportunities and innovation could abound.

   There’s a long way to go to fully realize this future, but when it
   happens, everything about how we interact with computers and the world
   will change.
   Follow me on Twitter or LinkedIn. Check out my website or some of my
   other work here.
   Jonathan Reichental, PhD
   Jonathan Reichental, PhD

     * Editorial Standards
     * Print
     * Reprints & Permissions

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
