   Skip to main content

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TTNXHQDD

Social and sign up

     * Follow
     * E-news Sign-up

User account menu

     * Log in
     * Search

   Go to the home page
   IET logo

Main navigation

     * Home
     * News
     * Topics
     * E+T Magazine
     * Resources
          + Webinars
          + Whitepapers
          + Videos
     * Jobs

   Quick links:
     * Home
     * Categories
     * Article Types
     * News

   Artificial Intelligence
   Government And Politics
   Legislation And Regulation

US, UK and 16 other countries sign AI security agreement

   Open-access content Beatriz Valero de Urquía — Tue 28 Nov 2023
   Artificial intelligence concept - Credit: iStock

   iStock

   The UK has unveiled the world’s first global guidelines for making
   artificial intelligence (AI) tools ‘secure by design’.

   The US, Singapore, Australia, Chile, Germany, Israel and Japan were
   among the 18 nations that have signed a non-binding public agreement
   that aims to secure AI systems against cyber attacks.

   The document has been developed by the UK’s National Cyber Security
   Centre (NCSC) and the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
   Agency (CISA), and endorsed by all G7 members. It was launched in an
   event in London, attended by more than 100 industry, government and
   international partners such as Microsoft, the Alan Turing Institute,
   and cyber agencies from the US, Canada, Germany and the UK.

   The guidelines set a ‘secure by design approach’, advising developers
   and organisations on the best practices for incorporating cyber
   security at every stage of the development process of AI algorithms.
   They focus on four key areas: secure design, secure development, secure
   deployment, and secure operation and maintenance.

   “Security is not a postscript to development but a core requirement
   throughout,” NCSC CEO Lindy Cameron said at the launch.

   The guidelines include advice such as the need to model threats to a
   company’s system, accounting for the growing dangers that come with
   growth, and the threat of future technological developments such as
   automated attacks. In addition, the document covers supply chain
   security, maintaining robust documentation, protecting assets and
   managing technical debt.

   When it comes to secure development, the plan advises that developers
   ensure the protection of the infrastructure used to support an AI
   system, including access controls for APIs, models and data. Moreover,
   models should be released “responsibly” – only when they have been
   subjected to thorough security assessments and making the most secure
   configuration the default for all users.

   The final section covers how to secure AI systems after they've been
   deployed, noting that companies continuously monitor systems, and the
   data that is entered into them, for signs of misuse.

   However, the guidelines do not address other concerns regarding the use
   of AI-generated content or the data chosen for its training.

   US secretary of homeland security Alejandro Mayorkas said: “We are at
   an inflection point in the development of AI, which may well be the
   most consequential technology of our time. Cyber security is key to
   building AI systems that are safe, secure, and trustworthy.

   “The guidelines jointly issued today by CISA, NCSC and our other
   international partners provide a common-sense path to designing,
   developing, deploying and operating AI with cyber security at its
   core.”

   The agreement is the latest in a series of initiatives – most of which
   provide general advice – pushed by governments around the world to
   ensure the ethical development of AI technologies. It follows US
   President Joe Biden’s signing of an executive order that would require
   AI developers to share the results of safety tests with the US
   government before they are released to the public. The order also
   directs agencies to set standards for that testing and address related
   chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and cyber-security risks.

   The Biden administration has been very vocal about its concerns over
   the rapid development of generative AI, and even unveiled a new AI Bill
   of Rights, which outlines five protections internet users should have
   in the AI age.

   The US and the UK were among the signatories of the Bletchley
   Declaration, described as a “landmark achievement” that signals a
   starting point in the conversations around the risks of AI
   technologies. The document has also been signed by representatives from
   the European Union and 28 countries, including China.

   UK science and technology secretary Michelle Donelan positioned the new
   guidelines as cementing the UK’s role as “an international standard
   bearer on the safe use of AI”.

   “Just weeks after we brought world leaders together at Bletchley Park
   to reach the first international agreement on safe and responsible AI,
   we are once again uniting nations and companies in this truly global
   effort,” she added.

   Last month, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak revealed the UK will launch an
   AI safety institute, following a similar announcement from the US.
     * Biden issues AI executive order to guard against the technology’s
       dangers
     * Sam Altman returns to OpenAI days after being fired
     * Countries sign ‘world first’ AI declaration at Bletchley Park
       summit

You may also be interested in...

   Books - Credit: Shutterstock Billion Photos

 Authors and publishers call for regulations to stop AI using copyrighted
works

   Tue 31 Oct 2023
   Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are using copyright-protected
   works “with impunity”, say publishing trade bodies, which are urging
   the government to act.
   Open-access content
   The Chancellor of the Exchequer leaves Downing St - Credit: Simon
   Walker / No 10 Downing Street is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 DEED

 The Autumn Statement: All the engineering and tech announcements

   Thu 23 Nov 2023
   Reforms designed to speed up energy grid connections and public
   investment in the manufacturing and space sectors have been announced
   by Chancellor Jeremy Hunt in his Autumn Statement.
   Open-access content
   Sam Bankman-Fried - Credit: Shutterstock

 FTX’s Sam Bankman-Fried found guilty of fraud and money laundering

   Fri 3 Nov 2023
   The founder of one of the largest cryptocurrency exchanges in the
   world, who “thought that he was above the law”, defrauded clients out
   of billions of dollars.
   Open-access content
   A movie by AI now showing - Credit: Shutterstock

 Would you watch a movie written by an algorithm?

   Thu 23 Nov 2023
   Artificial intelligence has arrived on set, prompting writers to debate
   whether algorithms could (or should) create art
   Members'-only content
   semiconductor - Credit: Shutterstock

 Microsoft launches custom AI silicon chips

   Thu 16 Nov 2023
   Microsoft has unveiled the Azure Maia 100 and Cobalt 100 – the first
   two custom silicon chips designed by the company in a bid to reduce
   reliance on Nvidia.
   Open-access content
   Two people pointing at a screen with weather forecast - Credit:
   Shutterstock

 DeepMind’s AI accurately forecasts weather in under a minute

   Wed 15 Nov 2023
   The artificial intelligence (AI) tool predicted that Hurricane Lee
   would land in Nova Scotia nine days before it happened – three days
   earlier than traditional methods.
   Open-access content
   University of Edinburgh, Scotland - Credit: Pexels

 University of Edinburgh launches generative AI laboratory

   Mon 13 Nov 2023
   A research and innovation laboratory at the university will attempt to
   develop safe artificial intelligence (AI) solutions and systems.
   Open-access content
   TikTok logo on phone screen - Credit: Dreamstime

 Nepal bans TikTok, accusing the app of ‘disrupting social harmony’

   Fri 17 Nov 2023
   The government of Nepal has decided to ban the popular social media app
   TikTok.
   Open-access content

More from Artificial Intelligence

   No description provided - Credit: Shutterstock

 EU reaches deal on ‘historic’ AI law

   Mon 11 Dec 2023
   The nations of the European Union have reached an agreement on the
   first comprehensive rules that will govern artificial intelligence
   algorithms, as well as social media and search engines.
   Open-access content
   Logos of OpenAI and Microsoft - Credit: Shutterstock

 UK to investigate Microsoft’s ties with OpenAI

   Mon 11 Dec 2023
   The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has revealed it is
   looking at whether Microsoft’s partnership with ChatGPT developer
   OpenAI can be considered a merger.
   Open-access content
   Juhani Hintikka - Credit: Nick-Smith

 The new battleground: Good AI v Bad AI

   Fri 8 Dec 2023
   While war in Ukraine has brought Russia’s online threat into sharp
   focus, Juhani Hintikka, CEO of Finland-based WithSecure, says cyber
   security is a battle that’s already being fought on every front, every
   day
   Members'-only content
   Book- nterview AI Battle Royale - Credit: Ashley Recanati SPringer

 Book Interview - AI Battle Royale by Ashley Marc Recanati

   Thu 7 Dec 2023
   While Industry 4.0 is poised to massively increase labour productivity,
   the downside is that it threatens our jobs, says Ashley Marc Recanati
   Members'-only content

More from Government And Politics

   Dirt field green field (Image credit: Elizabeth Lies | Unsplash)

 COP28 launches with historic ‘loss and damage’ deal

   Thu 30 Nov 2023
   The world’s nations have agreed to set up a fund to compensate
   developing countries that have suffered from the impacts of climate
   change.
   Open-access content
   green steel (Image credit: JAN LINDBLAD JR)

 UK must invest in green steel and protect its industry, ministers warned

   Thu 29 Jun 2023

   The government needs to step up and invest in green steel or risk the
   UK industry’s collapse, ministers have been warned.
   Open-access content
   Houses (Image credit: Dreamstime)

 Labour will take difficult choices on home-building, shadow housing
secretary says

   Wed 28 Jun 2023

   A Labour government will make the “difficult choices” when it comes to
   building more homes, said shadow housing secretary Lisa Nandy, as she
   accused ministers of being “afraid of the taboo” of the green belt.
   Open-access content

 Less than a fifth of Leave voters believe Brexit has ‘gone well’

   Thu 22 Jun 2023

   Less than one-fifth of Brexit voters believe it has been a success
   seven years on from the 2016 referendum, according to new polling.
   Open-access content

More from Legislation And Regulation

   A highway in the United States - Credit: iStock

 US sets off on road to mandate anti-drunk driving technology

   Wed 13 Dec 2023
   The US has begun the process to force carmakers to adopt technology
   that would prevent intoxicated drivers from starting vehicles.
   Open-access content
   Phone with Google and Facebook apps - Credit: Shutterstock

 Google, Meta and Qualcomm form partnership in response to EU internet rules

   Wed 13 Dec 2023
   Google parent Alphabet, Meta and Qualcomm have formed an alliance to
   push for open digital ecosystems in response to the European Union’s
   new laws regulating competition in the online world.
   Open-access content
   Unilever headquarters - Credit: Shutterstock

 Unilever faces investigation over claims it is ‘greenwashing’ its products

   Tue 12 Dec 2023
   Concerns have been raised that Unilever is overstating the green
   credentials of some of the products it sells, thereby misleading
   consumers.
   Open-access content
   No description provided - Credit: Shutterstock

 UK to boost domestic timber sector to 'lock up' carbon in buildings

   Tue 12 Dec 2023
   The government has launched a new roadmap aimed at boosting the market
   for homegrown timber and reducing the environmental impact of the
   construction industry.
   Open-access content

More from Beatriz Valero de Urquía

   Driver with its hands on its knees while in an autonomous vehicle -
   Credit: Shutterstock

 Tesla recalls two million cars over Autopilot safety concerns

   Thu 14 Dec 2023
   Elon Musk’s Tesla has agreed to recall over two million cars in the US
   after regulators identified a defect with its ‘Autopilot’ software
   system.
   Open-access content
   COP28 and United Nations flags - Credit: Shutterstock

 COP28 closes with 'historic' pledge to transition away from fossil fuels

   Wed 13 Dec 2023
   Nearly 200 countries agree to ‘transition away’ from fossil fuels and
   reach zero emissions globally by 2050.
   Open-access content
   No description provided - Credit: Shutterstock

 EU reaches deal on ‘historic’ AI law

   Mon 11 Dec 2023
   The nations of the European Union have reached an agreement on the
   first comprehensive rules that will govern artificial intelligence
   algorithms, as well as social media and search engines.
   Open-access content
   Logos of OpenAI and Microsoft - Credit: Shutterstock

 UK to investigate Microsoft’s ties with OpenAI

   Mon 11 Dec 2023
   The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has revealed it is
   looking at whether Microsoft’s partnership with ChatGPT developer
   OpenAI can be considered a merger.
   Open-access content

More from News

   Green hydrogen tank (Image credit: Shutterstock)

 UK ramps up green hydrogen ambitions with funding for 11 new projects

   Thu 14 Dec 2023
   The UK government has confirmed £2bn in funding for 11 “major projects”
   to produce green hydrogen and has confirmed that suppliers will receive
   a guaranteed price for the clean energy they supply.
   Open-access content
   Fighter jet - Credit: Shutterstock

 UK to build next generation of stealth fighter jets

   Thu 14 Dec 2023
   The UK, Japan and Italy have signed an agreement to build the next
   generation of fighter jets in Britain.
   Open-access content
   E&T

 China has stopped funding Hinkley Point C amid political tensions, report
claims

   Thu 14 Dec 2023
   The state-owned China General Nuclear Power Corp (CGN) has stopped
   making payments to fund nuclear plant Hinkley Point C amid high
   tensions between the UK and China, a Bloomberg report has claimed.
   Open-access content
   Driver with its hands on its knees while in an autonomous vehicle -
   Credit: Shutterstock

 Tesla recalls two million cars over Autopilot safety concerns

   Thu 14 Dec 2023
   Elon Musk’s Tesla has agreed to recall over two million cars in the US
   after regulators identified a defect with its ‘Autopilot’ software
   system.
   Open-access content

   View the discussion thread.

Join today

    In print
   current IET magazine cover - Uncredited

For IET members only

Apply online today!

   Become a member
   For more information, please follow this link.

    E-newsletters
   IET current newsletter.png - Uncredited

Straight into your inbox

Signing up to receive E+T News made easy!

   Sign up
   For more information, please follow this link.
   Go to the home page

   About us

   Newsletters

   Contact us

   Advertise with us

   E+T Jobs

   Facebook

   Instagram

   X (Twitter)

   YouTube

   Accessibility policy

   Anti-slavery policy

   Cookies

   Privacy policy
   IET logo

   © 2023 The Institution of Engineering and Technology.

   The Institution of Engineering and Technology is registered as a
   Charity in England & Wales (no 211014) and Scotland (no SC038698).
     * Built Environment
     * Civil Engineering
     * Computing & Comms Technology
     * Design & Manufacturing
     * Electrical Engineering & Electronics
     * Energy
     * Environment
     * Government & Politics
     * Healthcare Technologies
     * Leadership & Management
     * Transport
     * Other Things...

   (BUTTON) Close
   (BUTTON) Close

Follow us on social

   For the latest updates and more
     *   facebook
     *   twitter
     *   instagram
     *   youtube

   No description provided - Uncredited
     * Whatsapp
     * Twitter
     * Facebook
     * Linked in

Mobile Social and sign up

     * Follow
     * E-news Sign-up

Mobile User account menu

     * Log in
     * Search

   IET logo
     * Whatsapp
     * Twitter
     * Facebook
     * Linked in
     * Mail

Social and sign up

     * Follow
     * E-news Sign-up

User account menu

     * Log in
     * Search
