   #Medium alternate

   Open in app

   Sign up

   Sign in
   ____________________
   Write

   Sign up

   Sign in
   (BUTTON)

Advantages and Disadvantages of Artificial Intelligence

   sunil kumar
   Towards Data Science

   sunil kumar
   ·

   Follow
   Published in

   Towards Data Science
   ·
   5 min read
   ·
   Nov 25, 2019

   --
   (BUTTON)

   9
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   Listen
   (BUTTON)

   Share

   Artificial Intelligence is one of the emerging technologies which tries
   to simulate human reasoning in AI systems. John McCarthy invented the
   term Artificial Intelligence in the year 1950.

   He said, ‘Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence
   can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can be made
   to simulate it. An attempt will be made to find how to make machines
   use language, form abstractions, and concepts, solve kinds of problems
   now reserved for humans, and improve themselves.’

   Artificial Intelligence is the ability of a computer program to learn
   and think. Everything can be considered Artificial intelligence if it
   involves a program doing something that we would normally think would
   rely on the intelligence of a human.

   The advantages of Artificial intelligence applications are enormous and
   can revolutionize any professional sector. Let’s see some of them

   1) Reduction in Human Error:

   The phrase “human error” was born because humans make mistakes from
   time to time. Computers, however, do not make these mistakes if they
   are programmed properly. With Artificial intelligence, the decisions
   are taken from the previously gathered information applying a certain
   set of algorithms. So errors are reduced and the chance of reaching
   accuracy with a greater degree of precision is a possibility.

   Example: In Weather Forecasting using AI they have reduced the majority
   of human error.

   2) Takes risks instead of Humans:

   This is one of the biggest advantages of Artificial intelligence. We
   can overcome many risky limitations of humans by developing an AI Robot
   which in turn can do the risky things for us. Let it be going to mars,
   defuse a bomb, explore the deepest parts of oceans, mining for coal and
   oil, it can be used effectively in any kind of natural or man-made
   disasters.

   Example: Have you heard about the Chernobyl nuclear power plant
   explosion in Ukraine? At that time there were no AI-powered robots that
   can help us to minimize the effect of radiation by controlling the fire
   in early stages, as any human went close to the core was dead in a
   matter of minutes. They eventually poured sand and boron from
   helicopters from a mere distance.

   AI Robots can be used in such situations where intervention can be
   hazardous.

   3) Available 24x7:

   An Average human will work for 4–6 hours a day excluding the breaks.
   Humans are built in such a way to get some time out for refreshing
   themselves and get ready for a new day of work and they even have
   weekly offed to stay intact with their work-life and personal life. But
   using AI we can make machines work 24x7 without any breaks and they
   don’t even get bored, unlike humans.

   Example: Educational Institutes and Helpline centers are getting many
   queries and issues which can be handled effectively using AI.

   4) Helping in Repetitive Jobs:

   In our day-to-day work, we will be performing many repetitive works
   like sending a thanking mail, verifying certain documents for errors
   and many more things. Using artificial intelligence we can productively
   automate these mundane tasks and can even remove “boring” tasks for
   humans and free them up to be increasingly creative.

   Example: In banks, we often see many verifications of documents to get
   a loan which is a repetitive task for the owner of the bank. Using AI
   Cognitive Automation the owner can speed up the process of verifying
   the documents by which both the customers and the owner will be
   benefited.

   5) Digital Assistance:

   Some of the highly advanced organizations use digital assistants to
   interact with users which saves the need for human resources. The
   digital assistants also used in many websites to provide things that
   users want. We can chat with them about what we are looking for. Some
   chatbots are designed in such a way that it’s become hard to determine
   that we’re chatting with a chatbot or a human being.

   Example: We all know that organizations have a customer support team
   that needs to clarify the doubts and queries of the customers. Using AI
   the organizations can set up a Voice bot or Chatbot which can help
   customers with all their queries. We can see many organizations already
   started using them on their websites and mobile applications.

   6) Faster Decisions:

   Using AI alongside other technologies we can make machines take
   decisions faster than a human and carry out actions quicker. While
   taking a decision human will analyze many factors both emotionally and
   practically but AI-powered machine works on what it is programmed and
   delivers the results in a faster way.

   Example: We all have played Chess games in Windows. It is nearly
   impossible to beat CPU in the hard mode because of the AI behind that
   game. It will take the best possible step in a very short time
   according to the algorithms used behind it.

   7) Daily Applications:

   Daily applications such as Apple’s Siri, Window’s Cortana, Google’s OK
   Google are frequently used in our daily routine whether it is for
   searching a location, taking a selfie, making a phone call, replying to
   a mail and many more.

   Example: Around 20 years ago, when we are planning to go somewhere we
   used to ask a person who already went there for the directions. But now
   all we have to do is say “OK Google where is Visakhapatnam”. It will
   show you Visakhapatnam’s location on google map and the best path
   between you and Visakhapatnam.

   8) New Inventions:

   AI is powering many inventions in almost every domain which will help
   humans solve the majority of complex problems.

   Example: Recently doctors can predict breast cancer in the woman at
   earlier stages using advanced AI-based technologies.

   As every bright side has a darker version in it. Artificial
   Intelligence also has some disadvantages. Let’s see some of them

   1) High Costs of Creation:

   As AI is updating every day the hardware and software need to get
   updated with time to meet the latest requirements. Machines need
   repairing and maintenance which need plenty of costs. It’ s creation
   requires huge costs as they are very complex machines.

   2) Making Humans Lazy:

   AI is making humans lazy with its applications automating the majority
   of the work. Humans tend to get addicted to these inventions which can
   cause a problem to future generations.

   3) Unemployment:

   As AI is replacing the majority of the repetitive tasks and other works
   with robots,human interference is becoming less which will cause a
   major problem in the employment standards. Every organization is
   looking to replace the minimum qualified individuals with AI robots
   which can do similar work with more efficiency.

   4) No Emotions:

   There is no doubt that machines are much better when it comes to
   working efficiently but they cannot replace the human connection that
   makes the team. Machines cannot develop a bond with humans which is an
   essential attribute when comes to Team Management.

   5) Lacking Out of Box Thinking:

   Machines can perform only those tasks which they are designed or
   programmed to do, anything out of that they tend to crash or give
   irrelevant outputs which could be a major backdrop.

   SUMMARY:

   These are some advantages and disadvantages of Artificial Intelligence.
   Every new invention or breakthrough will have both, but we as humans
   need to take care of that and use the positive sides of the invention
   to create a better world. Artificial intelligence has massive potential
   advantages. The key for humans will ensure the “rise of the robots”
   doesn’t get out of hand. Some people also say that Artificial
   intelligence can destroy human civilization if it goes into the wrong
   hands. But still, none of the AI applications made at that scale that
   can destroy or enslave humanity.
   Artificial Intelligence
   Machine Learning
   Data Science
   Deep Learning
   Python

   --

   --
   (BUTTON)

   9
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   sunil kumar
   Towards Data Science
   Follow
   (BUTTON)

Written by sunil kumar

   152 Followers
   ·Writer for

   Towards Data Science

   Business minded machine learning engineer with proven ability to find
   hidden gems from different types of data.
   Follow
   (BUTTON)

   Help

   Status

   About

   Careers

   Blog

   Privacy

   Terms

   Text to speech

   Teams
